---
title: "What to do when your order has been cancelle"
date: 2024-06-23
---

At Shipt, we ran into an interesting problem that we called the “French Cancel.”  Certain asynchronous messages that were being emitted from the order management system were being sent with a status of `cancelle`.

In order to set the stage for this problem, you first need to know two things:
- Shipt was initially implemented as a trio of monoliths.  These monoliths provided all the necessary functionality to support Shipt’s initial core business function: gig workers going to grocery stores, picking items off the shelves and then delivering those items to your door.  After this core business functionality was established, Shipt expanded to a fourth monolith to support a new business case where an employee for a retailer would prepare an order for a customer and a Shipt gig worker would only be responsible for driving the order from the retailer to the customer.
- The English language is awful and `canceled`1️⃣ and `cancelled`2️⃣ are both valid.

I joined Shipt at a time when they were going through a modernization process, breaking their Ruby monoliths up into Go microservices and migrating their async workflows from SNS/SQS to Apache Kafka.  A few months into the transition, when the majority of functionality had been moved into microservices, someone from the data analytics team reached out to us to let us know that they had found that a small number of our orders were showing the “cancelle” state.  Now the order management system was derived from one of the three original monoliths, which all used `canceled`1️⃣.  But we also had to send messages to the microservices that were derived from the fourth monolith, the `cancelled`2️⃣ one.  Being the good engineers we immediately did a search on the code for a typo.  Sadly when that came back empty we had to do some real problem solving.  

This problem ended up being fairly easy to solve if you understand some of the internals of the Go language.  Because this status field was always directly set by code in our services, we knew that we weren’t receiving this bad string over the wire from another service.  We were also able to query the database to confirm that none of the orders in the system had the bad “cancelle” status.  With those two facts established the only remaining possibility was a race condition.

An important thing to know about go is that none of the primitives are thread-safe.  Our bad status was being stored as the string primitive.  The go string primitive is actually defined in go’s assembly code, but the runtime library gives us a structure that is analogous to the primitive form
```
type stringStruct struct {
	str unsafe.Pointer
	len int
}
```

Under the hood, the string primitive is really a pointer to an immutable byte array and a non-negative integer length.  When a string variable is updated, first a new immutable byte array is created with the new string literal value.  Then the byte array pointer in the string variable is updated to point to the newly created array.  Finally the length is updated.  Because of this, a process that is running on a separate thread can read the new byte array while using the old length.  In our case because we were going from `canceled`1️⃣, length 8, to `cancelled`2️⃣, length 9, what we ended up with was the first 8 bytes of cancelled, which is `cancelle`.

Here is some sample code that demonstrates the problem
(Here is a go playground version if you want to run it yourself https://go.dev/play/p/5ZwOth_UNY5.  Sometimes it exceeds the allowable run time and you need to run it again):
```
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

type Order struct {
	Status string
}

func foo(o *Order) {
	go func() {
		o.Status = "cancelled"
	}()
}

func main() {
	c := make(chan string, 1000)
	loops := 0
	for {
		loops += 1
		o := Order{Status: "canceled"}
		foo(&o)
		for i := 0; i < 1000; i++ {
			js, _ := json.Marshal(o)
			c <- string(js)
		}

		for i := 0; i < 1000; i++ {
			t := <-c
			if t == `{"Status":"cancelle"}` {
				fmt.Printf("%d, %d", loops, i)
				fmt.Println(t)
				return
			}
		}
	}
}
```

Our code had a large order object whose pointer was passed between functions.  In the case of our race condition, that pointer was being passed to a goroutine to emit a message on a cancelled topic over Apache Kafka, while the main thread was attempting to send a message on a canceled topic.  In the translation function that was converting the order object to the message data structure for the cancelled topic, instead of checking to see if the status was canceled and then setting the status property on the message data structure to cancelled, the original programmer set the status property on the order object and then copied that value into the message data structure.  The fix was simply to do the mutation on the message structure instead.

This issue really demonstrated what the Rustaceans already know, immutability is the best way to ensure thread safety.  It turns out that if you attempt to mutate shared state your order might end up cancelle.
